to run because there's so many nationalities in it.
And some of the preconceived notions from the old countries, so-called, come into that a lot.
And I'm assuming that each one feels theirs is the most important language.
Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
You know, you could, the Spanish, of course, have it made, and they keep saying, well, look, all around, next door, Mexico, go down south, it's all Spanish, Spanish.
And I said, yeah, but go across the Atlantic.
Nobody speaks Spanish except a few people on that little island.
part of the world in Spain.
But it's become harder and harder to justify German, a lot of emphasis on German, because after all German is not a world language anymore, if it ever was.
All right, now that leads me to a very important question.
What advice would you have for the department today?
If you were employed as a consultant, what advice would you give the Department of Modern Languages at Texas A&M?
I might be quite radical.
Advocate doing away with the European languages and substituting some of the whatever, Sri Lankan, whatever, the Asian countries, primarily because I think
For Europe there are lots of people who can manage European languages.
Well not necessarily at A&M but in the country at large.
But there's so few people who can handle Japanese for instance.
I think maybe the emphasis ought to be on the lesser known, but today, in today's world, more essential languages.
Should they attempt any more graduate programs?
Yes, definitely.
What I would like to see, though, to have for years, is a combination graduate program for, in business and foreign languages.
And how would that be?
Well, it works like this.
They take all the usual, learn all the usual things about business, whether it's management or... As an MBA?
As an MBA or maybe even a PhD.
And they would learn a great deal about the culture of various places, the business culture, the business climate, and the language.
Which languages would you start that?
Well, today things are in flux, aren't they?
A few years ago I was in Japanese.
I'm not so sure.
I think today it should be Chinese.
Would Spanish be?
Spanish will always be important because of the business we do with Latin America.
And should we emphasize Latin American Spanish or European Spanish?
You know, from what I've been told by my colleagues,
There isn't all that much difference.
Oh, okay.
So... Just a Christian tells me that, at least, and some others.
He said there's never any... It's like British English and American English.
If you know one, you can understand the other.
But...
Kind of interesting, I don't know.
Another thing that's important, by the same token, we should probably not give up French, because we're doing a lot of business with Quebec.
And believe it or not, Quebec corresponds, at least, in French.
I think they have a law that mandates that.
So it's interesting.
Let's see, here's a non-Texas A&M related question.
Should there be a single legal language in the United States?
Should we have an official?
I have a lot of friends who think so.
I'm not sure.
I do think everybody ought to speak English if he lives in this country, works in this country.
But I'm not sure that it needs to be by law.
I've been saying for a long time, if I could be the emperor, that means I don't have to explain anything to the voters.
I would require that every college graduate, as a condition of graduation, must have at least a speaking language, a speaking knowledge of a second language.
Yeah, exactly.
That the language of the marketplace in the U.S.
is English.
But if I also could speak Spanish here in Texas, I could have more.
Opportunities.
You have far more opportunities.
And if I'm going to be in the international business world, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, French, goodness knows.
Well, you know, it used to be a strange thing.
In the 19th century, people were better at speaking foreign languages than we are today.
Let's see.
Did you ever consider leaving A&M and taking a job elsewhere?
No.
Yes.
I don't know.
At one point I did.
And I had two offers for an interview.
And when the time came I got cold feet.
Why did you decide you wanted to stay here?
Well partly because I really liked my job here.
And also because
Life was very easy for me here with my children.
A single mother with four kids in College Station was far better off than I would have been at Illinois Southern or University of Oregon.
All right, now describe that life for a faculty, wife, mother in College Station.
It's not as hard as people make it seem.
I think there's an awful lot of hooey to this business.
My children will tell you, we have a wonderful relationship today.
Everything worked just fine for us.
And you were living where in those days?
College Station.
No, but what street?
Oh, well mainly on Glade.
Okay.
They could bike to school, and we never locked the front door because they'd lose the keys, and one thing and another.
It was just an easy place to raise kids.
And the quality of the Indian Solid School System, then?
It was all right.
At the time, it was pretty good.
I think it was at least as good as that in other states.
I've always found when two of my sons went to A&M out of Consolidated, got their degrees at A&M, I don't think they would have done any better had they gone to school elsewhere.
My daughter went to the University of Texas, but didn't stay there.
She was about to flunk out, so she transferred to St.
Marcus and finished there, and then she went back to Austin and got a master's degree there.
And the relative cost of
Well that was of course, you know, I couldn't have afforded anything except a public university for my children.
But the cost of living in College Station was relatively reasonable?
It was relatively reasonable all along I think.
The offers I had were from places like Illinois, Oregon, and Maryland.
I know Maryland is much more expensive.
And I didn't want to go back to the east coast no matter what.
What advice would you give to a new female faculty member at Texas A&M today?
Don't let anybody intimidate you.
Just stand your ground.
But you didn't have any problems of that, did you?
Well, no, I never did.
And I say I have worked in an all-male environment.
for so long, first with the Army for four years, then with Allen Academy for five years, that I just took all this for granted.
And I never really had a problem.
Nobody ever seemed to object to women.
The one thing I put my foot down pretty quickly,
Anytime I was on that committee, university-wide or otherwise,
Everybody would immediately insist that I become the secretary.
Not from day one, but from day two on, let's say.
I always refused.
I don't want to be the secretary.
Let Dr. So-and-so be the secretary.
I did not want to get into this typical stereotyping.
The woman has to be the secretary.
And after you said that, did people accept it?
Oh, yeah.
and then somebody else.
What do you think about A&M's quality today?
Well, from what I can tell, because I don't have very close contacts and all, they've come a long way.
And the one thing is that I find from talking to some of my friends is that I think the faculty is not as content or happy as they used to be.
They feel there's more pressure and more work and more everything.
But their salaries are more nationally comparable.
Exactly.
And their teaching loans are nothing.
When I tell them that we used to teach 18 hours, they just almost don't believe you.
And how many students normally were in a section in those days?
In those days, between 30 and 40, and today it's between 20 and 30.
And did you have any graduate assistants in those days?
As a matter of fact, when I had a graduate assistant, I hired them and paid them myself.
That was later on, when I was already department head, and I was teaching one or two courses.
And I really didn't want to grade all of those papers, and then hire one of our graduate students and pay him to do it.
What non-academic events at A&M did you participate in, or did you attend?
Well, in the early years, we had nice social activities.
We had regular dances.
Describe those please.
Well those were interesting.
Everybody came all dressed up.
We had an orchestra.
What was his name?
I forget.
Anyway we had a live orchestra.
Where was the dance held?
At the old MSC, I mean the old part of it.
The ballroom?
Ballroom.
And well that was always fun.
Did you go to Bonfire and Muster?
I did for many, many years.
I've given up the last 15 or so.
Did you ever go to Silver Taps?
Yeah.
What did you feel about those events?
Well, I felt that as if I were in a strange world.
I had been to various other schools and visited and been involved.
I'd never seen anything like what A&M has.
I think in view of our tragedy with the bonfire, it's a very good idea to think about what a tradition means.
Whether it's worthwhile, whether it's good, whether it's bad.
Certain traditions at A&M were horrible.
I was horrified when I found out some of my students could barely sit down because their rear ends were sore.
That was in my very early days.
I couldn't believe it.
That was a tradition that we didn't need.
But I think, you know,
Some of these other things, I had never been 100% on the bonfire.
And the reason for that is that every year about that time, my students stopped coming to class, or they would come back with a broken leg or something, limping.
It interfered too much with what I felt I was there to do with them.
I would have preferred bonfire like what the University of Texas used to have, or a little bit more like what the high schools have, a pile of old something, wood and lighting.
You can be just as cheerful about that ever since my spirit.
But I always resented the amount of time and labor that went into the bonfire.
There seemed to be a school spirit, a pride at A&M.
What contributes to that?
How has that developed?
Well, I think it basically goes back to a much, much earlier era when everybody was in the Corps.
Everybody lived in the dorms on campus, and they formed a very strong bond.
And somehow this carried over, but not to the same extent, I'm sure.
When the discussions were going on about co-education and voluntary core and racial integration, what did you and your faculty friends think about those possible changes?
They were all four of them.
Number one, in the department, everybody felt if they admitted women, we'd have more and better students, which turned out to be true.
The optional corps was also very popular.
For some reason liberal arts people basically don't like the corps, not anything military I guess.
And the less of it there was, the better they liked it.
And integration?
Integration, nobody even talked about it.
It was just a given.
It was coming, everybody knew it.
And higher admission requirements?
Admission requirements?
I think we always felt, most of us felt, that they needed to be raised if we wanted to end up with a product that we'd be proud of.
Because we really, 30, 40 years ago, got some good old little boys off the ranch or farm, and we were supposed to turn them into what, international, something with us, bankers or something.
It was a little unrealistic.
So I think it needs this broadening.
What was your perception of Earl Rudder as the president?
I admired him very much.
I knew his wife Margaret better than I knew him personally.
But I'm always impressed with a man who listens and a man who does what is best in spite of his own convictions.
Because the man must have admitted to himself, maybe I'm wrong on this, but I'm going to do it the right way.
You said you knew Mrs. Rudder.
Describe your friendship with her.
Oh, she's a delightful person.
I have over the years translated a good many letters, French letters for her, because you know she has those contacts in Normandy and keeps, kept getting, I guess she still keeps getting a lot of the letters.
And every now and then she would ask me to translate them, so I would and that was fun.
Oh very good.
If you ever had an opportunity with her today,
encourage her not to give those away.
Ann, the daughter, has told me, and Ann Wyatt has told me, that occasionally some stranger will go talk to Mrs. Rudder and will talk her out of some of those materials.
And what I want her to do is to give, if not the originals, at least copies to the archive.
Yeah, absolutely.
So they'll be saved forever.
She hasn't done it?
No.
She's saying, I don't know what to do with all of Earl's papers.
And I said, please, please, please.
Just give them.
Yes.
And that's what I wanted to say to you too.
If at any point you have any A&M materials that you are willing to part with, please give either the originals or copies to the archives because now in the Cushing Library there is space.
Yeah.
My daughter-in-law works at the Cushing Library.
Oh, oh, okay.
And she works in the, what is it, rare books.
Oh, good.
But I think she's about to do something else.
She's been going back to school.
She's becoming, she's almost finished, a computer programmer.
They make more money than librarians?
They make more money than the library helpers or whatever.
All right, now I'm about through with the topics I had thought of.
What have we not touched on that you wanted to be sure to include?
I think we've really pretty much covered it.
Okay.
One thing that really doesn't belong in here, I don't think, but that happened at one time was that there was a certain amount of animosity between various departments, particularly some departments are very
They want to hoard a bunch of courses for themselves.
You know how that goes.
But I remember that when we were within the College of Liberal Arts discussing, we made a proposal about foreign literature translation.
And we had a heck of a time with the English people.
Because they felt that was their area.
And we went round and round on that and eventually sort of settled.
They got some and we got some.
But there's always a certain amount of competition, which is perhaps very good.
Were there any departments that you all considered your allies?
Well, hopefully, we hoped that we'd have the college behind us, but we knew we didn't have economics behind us.
Although one of my colleagues in the department, Payne Hanson, John Hanson in the department, he was always very supportive, but he's more of a historian than an economist anyway.
It's a very interesting thing, by the way.
So many of the people, the women particularly, in my department had husbands in other departments.
They were almost all two people.
family, A&M family.
And that helped them sometimes to understand the realities of the departmental differences?
Yes, definitely.
And understand why they got so much money.
I know that Teolani at one point
was horrified how little money we were given for something.
And she said, well, in the chemistry department, they would have gotten 20 times done.
And I said, yep, those are the facts of life.
But it actually helped us get good faculty, because we had several people who wrote when we contacted them that they would be interested in a position only if they could find a position for the spouse.
And sometimes you all benefited from that?
We benefited from that, or we did what we could with another department.
And sometimes were you all the
the principal and the spouse found and other times the principal was somewhere else.
Right.
It happened both ways.
And it happened that we hired the woman and we had to find a spot for the husband too.
It wasn't just a group of women who got hired because their husbands had jobs.
It worked both ways.
All right, my next to the last gift then is this question is this.
Let's make believe that someone comes up to you and gives you a $1 million check with one requirement.
You must give that to Texas A&M, but you decide what they are to do with it.
What would you have A&M, if you had the capability to give a large gift, what would you want them to use it for?
That's a very difficult question actually because you have to trust the people to use the money wisely after they get it, whoever that is.
But you could, under this, you could specify.
I would improve the facilities for the foreign language department.
I would try to bring them up to the level of the University of Texas.
Have their own building, have the latest cutting edge equipment, the best faculty available.
Generally just raise up the whole thing.
Okay.
Then my last question.
What feelings do you have about Texas A&M in your heart?
Oh, I, you know, I got one degree at A&M.
That's just enough.
Actually, I love A&M.
And I've been very, very happy at A&M.
Maybe I would have been just as happy somewhere else.
I don't know.
But I've been extremely
content with my decision to remain here.
I'm not sure.
I wish that we could develop the liberal arts faster.
I know they're trying now to do something.
But for 40 years, it's been two steps forward, one step back.
And I would like to see that take off completely.
Are you proud to have been the first woman department head?
Oh yes.
You know, actually before me there were some women at A&M.
I don't know if you knew Mehta Brown.
She was a very famous geneticist.
But she wasn't a department head though.
She wasn't a department head, and she never even did any undergraduate teaching.
She had some graduate students as assistants who worked with them.
And even so, full professors.
At the time I retired, there were only four of us, I think, full professors.
And I was still the only department head.
So it really hasn't gone very fast.
I know some people were hoping that after me there'd be a real faster acceptance of women in leadership positions, but it's been pretty slow.
And most of it, again, has been in liberal arts.
But we have made some progress.
There are some others.
There's a woman in engineering and there are a few people here and there.
compared to other universities, we lag behind.
That's one thing that I know for a fact.
And on the other hand, some other universities fall into the other extreme.
They're practically all females on the faculty.
The University of Texas today is loaded with women.
Is that right?
Well, there's so many good ones on the market.
I don't know.
I never thought I would end up as department head.
I've always wanted to teach at the college level.
That's been my goal all my life.
I never thought I'd get to it because when I first came here I couldn't get a job at A&M because we had an anti-nepotism rule.
And that kept me out.
So I might have ended up at A&M earlier if I could have.
I was just as qualified as I was later.
Thank goodness we made that progress.
Yeah.
And I tried to basically, I've always tried to encourage my female faculty.
I think they needed a little bit more hand-holding and comforting than the others.
Women, in the beginning, they felt very uncertain of their role, and I think they tended to cave in easily, which is something I never could.
I've always been outspoken, and people who know me well would tell you that it didn't matter if it hurt my career or what, I couldn't tell it the way I saw it.
I was not going to be the token woman on the faculty.
That's a good summary.